[page 1: flbarkere1755001]

A few particulars of the late happily
departed widow. Sr. Eliz. Barker —
	Born at Tong in the year 1720 July 9th.
She was awakened to a knowledge
of her lost condition soon after the
Brn came into Yorkshire. The distress of soul
which she was in at this previous to her sight
peace and happiness in our Savr. was so great as almost
to bereif her of her senses, and over-
come every other consideration. Hearing
that there would be a preaching, here on
the place, she she run with a little
child in her arms (her daughter Hanah
who now lives in the Sr. House here) and
when she got to Fulneck, she left the 
child in the care of a Family, best
in returning home, her mind occupied
with what she had heard, and the state
of her own soul, that she forgot her
child, and returned home without.
Her neighbor believed and said, that
the Inghamites (as the Brn at that time
were called) had thrown her mad.


Read into the Congr. April 18th. 1755
partook first time of the H Cong. Sept. 6th. same year

[page 2: flbarkere1755002]

When it pleased our Savr. to reveal
himself to her distressed heart, granting
her pardon and peace, her joy and
and gladness was as great as her
as her sorrow and distress had been
before. Her resolution now to live to
him and his his people, brought
upon her the several trial, from the
enemies of the Brn., who at that time
were very numerous and exceeding
bitter. The Landlord under whom they
lived sent for her husband and insisted
upon it, that he & his wife should go
to the Church, and not attend at that
baudy house — meaning the Brn preaching 
place — threatening them at the same
time, that if they did not obey him
he would immediately turn him off his work & out of
their house. Her husband came home
greatly alarmed, at the threats of his
Landlord; and thinking that they
would be ruined in their out ward circum
stances if they, by ( attending the  

[page 3: flbarkere1755003]

meetings of the Brn, — should provoke
him to put his threatening into exe
cution, endeavoured to persuade his
our late Sr. to leave the Brn and
go with him to Church. This she
could not consent, upon which her
husband grew exasperated at her
and told her that if
determined to persist in following the
Brn he would be a ruined man —
he would therefore leave her to her
self and have nothing more to do
with her, and left the house, and
went and joined his old companions
at the ail  house, who were glad
to have him in their company
again, and that he had forsaken
the Brn. and returned to his former course.
They did all they could to
prejudice his mind more
against the Brn by saying all
manner of evil against them

[page 4: flbarkere1755004]

and encouraged him not to return
to his wife but to forsake her intirely  
if she would not give up her connex
ion with the Brn.. In this way they
spent 3 or 4 days, drinking the whole
time. O our late Sr was left with 
2 small children the oldest not above
2 years old. This Landlord got to 
hear that she persisted in
going to the Brn Meeting, at which
he was terrible enraged,
gave her notice to quit the house
immediately or he would pull it down
upon her head, but as she did not
obey, he came the next day with a
company of workmen and in a 
most furious rage ordered the house
to be uncover’d  while she with her 2 small Children were in it when she saw that
she must leave it she took her
little ones, telling him as she passed
Him, “He might pull her earthly
house down, but she had a house in heaven

[page 5: flbarkere1755005]

which he could not destroy. In these
distressing circumstance she came for 
help and advice to the  Brn.. who encouraged
her to go and prevail, if possible, with her
husband to return home with her. She
did so, entreating him with many tears to
leave that company and go with her, to
which however he would not yield, excepting
she would first promise to go to the Church
with him. She consented and accompanied
him the next Sunday. But the night
following he had a very alarming &
terrifying dream, respecting his conduct
toward his wife and particularly his
having forced her against her conscience
to stay from the meeting of Fulneck
and he likewise became very much
destress’d about himself, promised
never to hinder her and more and ever
after he kept his promise. He him
self soon after joined the Brn. Congr. & partook
of the H Comm with the same.
Altho our late Sr. now met with no obstacles 
in attending the preaching of the Brn.. from 
							the

[page 6: flbarkere1755006]

the side of her husband, yet as several
of her neighbors were, at that time, from
mistaken notions of the Brn. Were imbittered
against them, she was under the
necessity of attending in secret & coming
by ways for fear of being molested.
	She was for many years the general
Nurse in Fulneck and was much
Respected in that line.
In the year 1778 she became a widow,
and in 1783 she got leave to be a member
Of this Congr. and moved into the
Choir house; a favor which she often
acknowledged with heartfelt thankfulness
and gratitude to our gracious Lord.
The Spiritual welfare of her Children
was a concern which was ever uppermost
in her mind, and whenever an oppty. Offered
she never failed to warn those who were
careless and indifferent about the salvation
of their mortal souls, and to set before
them the extreme danger of continuing living in

[page 7: flbarkere1755007]

a carnal unregenerated course, and to set
before them the love of Jesus to repenting 
sinners, and how happy they might be
in him.

about 4 years ago she had the misfortune
to fall and break her collar bone
and was otherwise much hurt. Tho’
she so far recovered as to be able to walk 
about, yet she never got intirely well
but always complained of an in
ward hurt in her side, previous to
this she had enjoyed a good state of health
and a strong constitution and a great
flow of spirit. When she found her health
declining and other weaknesses
