2. The Widow Christine Eleonore Seidel.
(her Maiden Name was Peistel)
She wrot  wrote of herself:
I am born the 28th of May 1707 at Litowiz in
Misonie. Myn Vater has been Carl Fridric Peistel
and my Mother Eleonore born of Bradenstein,
of the generation Zoeshen by Merseburg. We have
been 5 Brethren & Sisters Children, two of them 
are gone home in their tender Ages, and we three
have been brought up at home, and we came according
to our Pradestination to the Congregation.
We had a Lovefull but a serious Mother,
who had our true best at Heart, She was a 
Lover of the Cross of Christ & aknowlegd  acknowledged
Christ crucified for her only Happeness  Happiness in time
& Eternity for every Body. She had a Conexion  Connection
w.th our Saviour & did not Love the World, &
This has been the Subsect of her discoursing w.th us, in a very
evangelical Manner & this effected towards our Mother by us
a great Love & respect. By occassion  occasion She very often
declard to us: that our Saviour certified her Heart,
that not one of her Children should be lost, but all
should become his Property & live for him in this World.
This made some times a deep Impression on our Hearts,
I for my Part was not without Feeling, nevertheless I
did not know my Redeemer. In the Time following
the Lust to the World begun to stir & I begun  began to like
the World & the World liked me & seekd for me.Alone my true Saviour did't leave me Rest in
Pleasure whatsoever but transformed all wordly Plesures  Pleasures
into Bitterness, Grief & Mourning. I knew very well
I was not converted & therefore toock  took one Resolution
after the other, but without Effect; then I allways  always begun
driven by the Restlessness of my Heart w.th my own
Power, therefore I never found rest or get into a 
true Conexion  Connection w.th our Saviour. By the infattigable
Disire  Desire of our dear Mother our Saviour provideth for
us, and we got a Proceptor from Dr Buddei, Named
Hofman (a intimate Friend to our blessed B.r Vierroth)
who recommented  recommended contualy continualy  continually the Love of
our crucified Saviour w.th a burning Heart to
us; and was of one Opinon  Opinion w.th our Dear Mammy.
A.o 1735 our dear Saviour took our dear Mother
on a sudden but very happy home to himself.
We, her three Children where present, because our
Brother to the same time a Prussian Officir  Officer came
home by a instinct unknown for what, he found
her still well, but had not long to wait to see her
clossing  closing her Eyes happy & in Peace. Her so happy
& Joyfull  Joyful Far well  Farewell, had such a Effect on our Hearts
that we three together tock  took the resolution at once,
to have no part w.th the World, but to give our
whole Hearts to our Saviour Jesus Christ.
But I for my part did't know this true Friend
of Siners  Sinners. I tried all the means I could, I read very

[page break]

often the History of the Suffering & Death of our Saviour
not without Effect upon my Heart; but I allways  always begun  began
by becoming Pious & to Show my Duty to God, and
so I came by all my restlessness not farther.
Then I became aquainted  acquainted with Separatists, & would
undoubtedly have fallen deeper & deeper in my own Working;
had not our Saviour directed, that Magister Seidel was calld as
Deacon to Mutschen as the Place of our Residence.
He begun to preach our Saviour w.th Power & Grace &
our Sav.r regulated it so that I became his Wife, noth_
withsanding  notwithstanding all the Dificultys  Difficulties which would arise in this
respect. This Marriage was a great Blessing to my
Heart. My Husbands' tender Conversation w.th our 
Saviour moved my Heart anew, that as he ask'd me
in the first Days of our Marriage: how it would be
with me? if Poeple  People would drive him out for the Sacke  Sake
of our dear Saviour out of the Town & Country?
I made a Covenant w.th him, to follow him willingly [.]
and partake w.th him for our Saviours Sake what
would follow. A. 1740. He went to see the Congregation
in Hhuth. This Visit brought a great Blessing about
his Heart and I got my Share by that dreams to.
From this Time quite a new a happy Period begun
w.th us. A.o 1741. The 22d of March as he was
Preaches to the Garrison at the Castel of Königs Stone
our dear Saviour took him home in his eternal
favoty. He Witnesseth still on his Sick Bed towards all 
who came to see him, from the Power of the Blood
of Christ with a becoming Tenderness.
His happy & Joyfull  Joyful Departure to our Saviour renewd
& fastened the Impression, I had, of the blessed Con_
versation w.th him.
Now my former Inclination to the had fixd in me such a
Fear of myself, that I no where trusted to live, &
imagined Danger every where; but the Friend of
my Soul soon recollected to me, that I lookd more
on my blessed Husband as on the Conexion  Connection w.th him.
This made me prostrate myself before & I begged
w.th 1000 Fears forgiveness over all what passed.
He Mercy took me as I was, & I had from
thence a more happy Period. By all that, I could
not get rid of my Scrupulosity by the feelings of
my Misery & like a Child draw near to him
according to my Wish, therfore  therefore the Fear of myself
darkneth my happy Hours very often. In this
very Year, I & my Sister went to see the Con_
gregation at Hhuth, there I feeld  felt the very
Peace of God, and the Brethren & Sisters I
loockd  looked on as Children of God and had a great
respect towards them & I wishd incognito to
live in this Place. 1742. We came to see Hhuth a
second time & there we detemind  determined to remove thither.
But by setting out for Herrnhuth some Accident
happened & we possponed  postponed our Journey. Hereby

[page break]

a dangerous Period for my poor Heart begun,
a false Poeple filled our Minds with so much
dangerous Expectations and Things against the
Congregation, that our Journey was quite dropt  dropped.
By all that our Saviour was so gratious  gracious to
beware that I did't sin against his Church, &
my Disire  Desire still remaining to spent  spend my Days under
this Poeple. I was busy in reading the Deciples  Disciples
Semons  Sermons deliverd at Berlin & begged our Saviour
very often that if I belonged to this Folks, 
he would himself find means to bring me thiter  thither.
As my Brother moved from Wetteravia to Bertholsdorf,
I & my Sister paid him a Visit there for some
Weeks, by that we saw what false Opinions
had for foundation. But for all that I knowd  knew
very well that some Poeple  People who came to the Con_
gregation have been sent by & by back again, this
made me terribly afraid to venture asking Leave
nevertheless I feeled  felt a Instinct in my Heart
that I belonged to this People. At last I & my
Sister desireth Leave to stay in Bertholsdorf
(only to be near Hhuth & to try if we belong
to the Congregation or not) We got Leave
& then the 9th of Jan. 1747. we arrived in
Bertholsdorf to stay there.
Exact a Month past  passed as the 9th of Febr. in a 
                                                                         Meeting
Meeting at the Hall in Hhuth as they sung this
vers  verse: Wie bin ich doch so herzlich froh. My bloody
Redeemer on a sudden appeard before me, & my
poor Heart melted away by feeling his blessed
Nearness for Shame about my deep Misery &
Sinful Condition. I never can forget this
blessed Moment & I shall remember it & adore
my Saviour therefore in Eternity.
From this Time the Sisters took more particular
Care upon me, & for all I liveth in Berthols_
dorf I got Lieve  Leave to partake on the Communion_
Meetings in Hhuth.
1747 the 22d of Octob.r to the greatest Joy
& Shame of my poor Heart, I was received in
the Congregation in Hhuth, this gave one a new
Spirit to lay down my whole Heart before my
Redeemer as a poor Reward for his Trouble;
and still I remember by every Reception, the 
Grace beflowed upon my Soul by this Opportunity.
A.o 1748 March 20th I removed from Hh
Bertholsdorf to Hhuth
March 25th our Saviour beflowed the great Mercy on me
to partake w.th the Congregation the holy
Sacrament of his inestimable Flesh & Blood.
Here all Words fall to short to express what my
                                                                     poor

[page break]

poor Heart felt thereby.
From that Time I passd my Time as well in the
Congregation as my dear Choir chearfull  cheerful and
happy and my Heart was realy  really attached to our dear
Saviour. If some times a cloudy Hour came
upon me, as whereto my poor Temper much
inclined, it was soon dispersed as soon as my
Heart weept  wept for our dear Saviours feet.
A.o 1756 the 14th of March I was taken among
the hourly Intercessors, by this special Conversation
w.th our dear Saviour, I had many Blessings &
for fo my own part many delightful Insights into the Siner_
loving Heart of our Redeemer.
The 3th of Febr. a.c. I was received amongst the Acoluths.
received. the 8 of July as the new Classes who were
errected I became a Help Mate in one of them.
The 3th of Febr. I became the first time Choir Disciple
which was a Opportunity to keep closse  close to the Heart
of my dearest Redeemer & a true blessing for my
poor Soul (after that this Grace happened oftener to
her, and She was the last Choir Disciple.)
In the Beginning of the Year 61. Our dear Saviour
was very gratious  gracious to me & blest  blessed me w.th his Nearness
& my constant Prayer was only: Dear Saviour
remain so with me, till I see thy face to Face.
                                                                18th Febr.
 The 16th of Febr. a.c. I had the Pleasure to move in
our new Choir-House. I desireth by that means by
our Saviour as a Present a quite happy Choir Heart.
(Since that I had lived in the House of my Brother.)
He alone knoweth the Fears of my Heart, and I know
he'll transfer me by his Mercy to his own & holy Pleasure.
So far her own Words.
That our Saviour was near to our blessed Sister in her
Choir-House & heard her Disires  Desires may easely  easily be
seen by the following verses, which she made on her
last Birth Day the 28th of May:
Wie dank ich dir mein ewger Mann
for das, was du dis Jahr gethan
an deinem armen sundgen Kind
das nichts als Mängel an sich findt.
                  X      X
Ich gebe deinen blutgen Fuss
den sünderhafsten Gruss und Kuss
for alle Gnade und Geduld
und fors vergeben meiner Schuld.
                        X    X
Ach wie beshämt es mich so sehr
Dass ich dir noch nicht mehr zur Ehr
Schenk mir ein ganz zersehmolzen Herz
verliebt in deinen Todt und Schmerz
                 X   X
Gott heilger Geist du Mutter mein
lehr mich dir recht gehorsam sein
ergiess Dich reichlich uber mich
Zum Pfingst-Fest das erwarte ich.

Und hofe auf ein seligs Jahr
Als sonsten noch Nie keines war.
O dass du mich so schmuktest aus,
Dass mich mein Mann nehm bald nach Houss.
                  X      X
Wie würde doch dem Würmelein
Beym Sehn des Lams zu Muthe sein
Vielleicht ben ich heut ubers Iahr
By Ihm in seiner obern Sohaar.
            X        X
Drum soll myn Aug auf nichls mehr Sehn
Als nur auf seine Leidens Schön
Dem Ohr gefalle sonst kein Klang
als nur der Passions Gesang.

It was very plain to be perceived, that the
holy Ghost hastened with her Adornment;
She could herself nothing imagine more
sweet as to receive the last Kiss from
the lovely Lips of her Lover; and this her
last Sickness was the Opportunity to still her
Disire  Desire. The 23th of March, She was taken
by a hard fit of Colic, that She was forced to
keep to her Bed, but by all her Pain, the
Conversation w.th our dear Saviour & his
Smart & Sufferings made her Sick bed
easly  easily & suportable  supportable to her.
The 24th She found herself very weak &
                                                              expected
her great Sabbath Day with extaordnary Longing
took tender Leave by Words so much for Weakness'
would allow to express by her Brother, Sister & other
Aquaintances  Acquaintances, but afterwarts  afterwards She expressd her tender
Love by a smiling Look on, [a] so She remaineth
present to herself to the last Gap or Breath.
When They sung verses, She refresheth her Heart by
and sung accompanied w.th a broken Voice, sometimes strechd
out her Arms towards her Brautigroom!
As the last Moment came nearer, then they
Blest  Blessed her in the Name of her Choir w.th a un-
comon  uncommon Feeling of the Nearness of our dear
Saviour, & under these Words: Ihr Glieder
rein Gott ehr euch, des heilge Geist ver-
klär euch. flew the 23th in the Evening
her reconciled Soul happy home in the 
Wounds of Jesus Christ. A still & blessed
Peace of God extented  extended themselves about all
who were present & left to her Corps  Corpse a 
lovely Prospect.

 