I. The Widow Judith Quïtt.
The following are her own Words, which She left in writing
behind her.
I am born 1683 the 29th of Sept. at Kunewalde in Moravia.
My Vater Dav. Shindler & my Mother have been concerd concern'd
about their Salvation, & so they did whatever they could to
bring me up in a religious Way. In the 8th Year
of my Age, I feeld  felt the first Labour of Grace in my Heart,
but afterwarts  afterwards went to divert myself w.th the World, not
without restlessness & Disatisfaction in my Heart.
In my 22d Year of Age I marryed  married & intented  intended to carry
on with my Husband a pious Life. I indeed begun  began to be confident
towards my Redeemer, who very gratiously  graciously vouchsaved
towards us. We soon get Intelligence of the great Awakening
in Teshen, but as our Daughter made a Visit there, She
                                                                              was betrayed

was betrayed & my Husband was for that put in Prison.
However soon as he was set free again, he did't [?]
[?] could for all that not be silent by the Visit of 
Christ.n David & the following great Awakening in this Country;
and was by that means imprisoned a second time. I came
in hard Circumstances for his Sake at last I got Bail
& he was set at Liberty again. Now we seriously intented  intended
to leave our Mother-Country, because we had no rest & to 
follow our Brrn which went before us. But as afterwarts  afterwards
Melchious Nitshman with two familys  families more went away,
such a wild Commotion ensued that we must in half a 
Hours time determine to leave our whole Habitation
for our Souls Sake. I intented  intended to take some Linen along
w.th me, but could not find in haste the key-hole, [?]
[?] flung the key away & went w.th my Husband & three
Daughters out the Door. Scarce had I left my Habitation
then Heart feeld  felt Rest & Peace, that nothing in this World
would have inticed me to return again. But scarly we
had pursued our Journey some Miles, we fell in with
8 young Men who brought us in the greatest Distress
& sevel times tyed  tied us. O in what Dificulty  Difficulty were we in!
We knowed  knew what sort of Holes were preport for us in Prison;
therefore we took refuge to begging & told them the would 
consider our Distress & let us go, They were very hard &
inmoveable  immovable but at last they said, as we go for our Con-
siences Sake they would let at Liberty. Who was more glad
then  than we, we procedeth  proceedeth our Journey w.th a more firm Con_
fidence & Faith. At Schönbrunn, where our dear Brother
de Seidliz had part of his Dominion, we heard the first
                                                               Protestant Pr.

[page break]

Protestant Preaching en enjoy'd the Love & Goodness of
every Body. This we enjoyed every where, on our Journey
till we at last save arrived at Bertholsdorf. We went
the same Day to Hhuth, where they was just a building the
Congregation House, the Brethren which was on the Roof
knowd us, came down, saluted us with great Joy & Amazement
that we escapd so happily. But as to the same Time was 
no Employment for us there, then we lived 8 Weeks at
Bertholsdorf w.th Vater Nitschmann, but afterwards
the blessed Lady the Gersdorf took us under her Care & pro-
vided us a Lodging & Boarding at Kemniz. But as our
dear Lady a Year after went to her Saviour, we beggd
by our blessed Disciple for a Place in Hhuth. We aquainted
our Lord & the Minister at Kemniz w.th our Intention,
But they disuadeth us: saying what we would do
in this Desart  Desert? & who would give us there our Allimendation?
My Husband answerd  answered: Our Saviour who nourished
4000 Men in the Desart  Desert, He hoped will find Advise  Advice
to bring us there through to. We moved also A.o 1726
to Hhuth, where we found several Trials in the first
Years, & I found out very soon, that the bare
Emigration from my Mother Country, was not enough
to set my Heart at Rest. The fundamental Him:
not to belief on the Son of God & his meritorious
Wounds, was here laid open to me, so that I did't
venture to go to our Lords Supper & thereby lost
the great & blessed Comunion  Communion the 13th Augs at Berthols-
                                                                                                       dorf.
 dorf. In this Situation I pined a good While, till our
Sav.r once very graciously loock  look on comforted &
absolved me from all my Sins & tresspasses & I
experienced the Power of his bloody Redepmtion very
emphatically in my Hert  Heart: This was the 9th of March 1728.
After that I enjoyd w.th the Congregation the first time
the holy Sacriment  Sacrament. Afterwarts  Afterwards I came under the
hourly Intercessors, & so by Degrees in Several Employ-
ments in the Congregation, & I could every thing where
I was apointed  appointed for, execute w.th the greatest Plesure  Pleasure
& willingness of my Heart. After passing 10 Years
in Hhuth, my Husband & I got a Call to Ebersdorf
as Parents for the Children in the Anstalt there.
After a Stay of 3 Years we came at the Roneburg,
& then to Mborn & Hhaag, every where in the
same Quality. After my dear Husband (w.th whom
I lived 37 Years in a happy & chearfull  cheerful marriage
State, & had w.th him three Daughters, wherefrom
only one is still alive) A.o 1742 went to our dear
Saviour; then I was apointed  appointed Labourer with the
Sister Hofer by the Wittows  Widows at Hhaag. &
A.o 1746 I came hither to Hhuth in my Choir_House
to rest myself. Our Saviour like formerly also here
to proved himself the best & most true Friend of my poor
Soul. A.o 1756 the 23th of March I moved upon our
blessed Disciples Advise  Advice to Gnadenfry & was very sure
that this was the Place where my & eternal true Husband
would finish me to go happy & in Peace in his eternal Joy
So far She herself.                                                   She