Page 1Som remarks as under ofOur Sister Martha Powell’s Life	       (viz)I was Born Feb. 12. 1704 in NorlyNear Oxford, in England	My Father ^(Tho Prichett) was by Trade a Cooperhe liv.d verry Natral. conserning himself with Religon like othersof the Church of England. He was earnest in putting me to a DancingSchool as also much delighted inseeing me Exersise & practise the same	My Mother was brought up and liv.d a Quaker till the time of her Marriage on which Day she was Baptised. She had an uncommon affection & desier for the salvation of Her Children. Which extraordinary appeared in her lingering illnessoften speaking of our Dear SavioursMerrits on which she trustedCommitting the care of her little onesto him with prayers & many Tears				She
Page 2She Deceas.d yong at the 5th yearof my Age. & in my tender yearsI drank in the Delights of the World. as Dancing & mirth, with all viggouryes often in Church I was Disolv.d in tears in hearing the Epistels & Gospels Read, & perticuler such as mention.d the Passion & Suffering  of our Dear Saviour	But on my being under a step- Mother, at my 15th year I left themHiering my self out, from placeTo place in Oxford where on Acct of my fine aire in Dancing I was much esteem.d by the Rich jentrey	About the 1735 & 31st year of myAge I became at times trubilled &uneasy by means of som Low preic- hers that kept society meetingsin the Citty.  at which time I liv.d with the Rever.d M. Wilder whosWife on perceiving my Behaviour chang.d (^her temper) us.d all possible means to turn & Divert me from it. but as she therby avail.d nothing she chang.d 					her
page 3
her behaviour to all reviling cursing & the most vulgar scandellous expressions, on which I left her	After this I once being sent forearnestly desiring I'de com to a great Ball of Gentelmen & Ladiesbut on my refusing there came to me one of these, Asshewering me the Ball could not be properly carriedon without me, on which I consentedbut just in the begining of this my last Dance I was struck with such Anguish, pain, & Horrour that I withhast got out, earnestly beseeching the Lord to bare & have mercy on me, in so great a Sin, against Betterknowledg- this was the heaviest Night I (as yet) ever felt # now I Kept diligent to my sociatey meetingAs also to Church, & Sacrament, every Sonday. With, & amongst the so cal.d Methodists. as which time Br. KenchinJ. Gambold & som others kept the Meetings	Once about the year 39 I had the most Hellish Night wherin my Eyes				ware
page 4
ware never clos.d Satan to all myApprehencion Stood by my Bed. contin-ualley suggesting that as I had serv.dhim I was his property & belong.d of Right to him- In the Morningcame Brother Kenchin with other ofthe friends whom I much dislik.d being miserable & unhappy. the which he perciev.d using many means to get me to sit with him & his friendsas a sort of a feast of love. when his subject & whot he spoke was such & adapted in perticuler to me the same pressing floods of tears from my eyesnotwhithstanding I just before hadbeen nothing but Enmity. This gave me much ease #	About this time Brother Vine wassent here by the Brother- in London to visit & preach & see what he could collect out of our Sociaty 	On hearing this what Brother VinePreach.d I lost my Curs. fear and Condemnation in the love of Jesus	about this time on a Whitsen Monday I & 13 more as by Appointment 				Met

page 5Met, at a friends hous, in the Cittywhere we had a feast of Love with singing. When Brother Vine prayed, all kneeling at which time our Dear Saviour My Lordand My God Stood before me inHis Mangel.d, Suffering, Bleeding Form & Figuer- and Spoke quiteplaine to me these words (viz)	I have lov.d thee with an everl-	=lasting love, & none shall pluck 	these out of my Hands
---        This sight far above all Heavenlyvisions, or whatever can be nam.dat once, sav.d me, the which I believe 
and feel thro time and in eternity.
	I from this unspeakable mercy& condesencion of my Dear Saviour was light & happy as an Angel # N.B  about 6 months before Vine came the Disipel visited Oxford & thro Brother Henchin as his inte-rpiter spoke with all the awaken.d men at 6 inthe morning. & with the women at 8 in the Even.& on his return to Germany he sent Sister Vinefrom thence to Oxford & soon after the Disciple Rote ordering Brother Vine to see if I would move to Germanybut if not then I should come to London. 

page 6Angel—On my choosing reather to stay in England then go to Germany I being sent for soon after travilled to London where I liv.d about 9 Months
 [deleted matter]with one Mrs. Nicolos when I was us.das laboures in my Choir when I enjoy.d unspeakable Happy Sesonsin real Singleness of Heart	In the year 40, 1 O.S. on Feb 5I enter.d the Married State & on next March the 4th I with my Dear Husband went on board with the first sea Cong--regation for Pensylvania, this voyageas also travilling with our Saviour'sPeople had been deeply imprest inBoth our Hearts before we had anyapprehension of changing our States	On this voyage I experienced muchgrief & Sorrow principally ocassion.dthro & by my sister in law whose mean origen I knew, we both being Born & & grown up in one Neighbourhood				-butPage 7but now on her coming from theCongregation in Harrandike deny.d That I knew her decent, & thro her unconverted, wicked mind, earnestlyendeavour.d every way practicable to blemish, & hurt me. 	But He, who first say me lying in my Blood, continu.d the same nearFriend oft repeating to my Heart the first comfortable words (viz)	I have loved thee with an everlastinglove, & none shall pluck thee out of my hand	This I alwais prov.d ^=& found Efficatious to soften & sooth each  grief & truble, as alsoto quell each ould unlamblike passion	we Ariv.d by way of N. Yark in Philladelphia in May on AssentionDay 41. here we say the Dear Disipel whom thro our 3 months voyage we had so often wish.d to see, yea his being hear strengthen.d my inclinationto follow him 	on our coming as some of the first Settelers of Bethlehem in this yong Congregation of whichI had the Grace to become a Memberas also not long after an Acqalut but before this I became a Member					of

page 8
of the Holy Communion tho atthis time I understood little or nothing of German yet each Opportunity with the love I felt to the Geshw(^rs) 
from that I felt to our Dr. Saviourin this young little Congregationexciting in me all willingness to help& assist where I could – all was to me a coind of a nether Parradice	On December 24 this year the DesipelJournying from Bethlehem to Philladelphiaappointing us to follow him therefrom whence he sent us to Ne:Shamanywhere I with my Dear Husband stayed 3 months so return.d to my Dear Brr.where I enjoy.d unspeakable blessingsin singelness of heart. I alwaisfound when as it sometimes happen.dthat by som of my Sisters I was Accus.d for my over plainness our Dr. Saviour who had said he so lovedme bore me through alwais mainta--ning my credit by my labourers	In the year 44, I with my DearHusband resided in the West JarseesAbout 4 months in blessing, and				SoonPage 9Soon after were sent & liv.d with Captain Garrison on Staten Island staying with him till he himself wasabout to move, in all love	In 46 I with my Dear Husbandresided for a time in Dansbury 	In the year 48 in May I with myDear Husband travil.d & mostly on foot to Shomoco where I seem.d neargoing home on a feavour from whence we retunrnd in October just reaching Dear Bethlehem on the Eve ofthe Elders Fast, after which Ibecame Congregation Servant.	about the year 51 in JohannasNitchmonds time I with my Husbandrecided 7 months on Long Islandfrom whence we mov.d a second time to Dansbury, where havingbeen about one year we return.d& began the first Store in Bethlehemfrom whence I with my Dear Husband ware (tho on our side with the greatestreluctance) mov.d to Grandenhittwhere I liv.d about 9 Months inFear with cencible apprehencon 				Of

page 10
Of that which fell on us (^in the night) on Nov 24thir was a hea(^v)y Night I had with my Dr Husband in the woods wherein the Murdering Sprits & powers of Darknesspres.d heavy	I being comforted & recover.d res=pecting this heavyness for 6 months inDr Bethlehem, when with my HusbandI travil.d to & recided 3 year in N Englandwhere I enjoyed numberless blessingshaving the Grace to see there a Cong--regation settlel.d by Dear Br Spanengburg	being return.d from N England hav--ing rested 8 weeks in Bethlehem I with my DrDr Husband set of on my Birth Day Being Feb. 12. 1759 for Jamica with My Losung	Observe the Losong & Hymn on that	Day from Brother Spaningberghere I lov.d & was lov.d by the poor DearNegro slaves for near 6 years when at last the heat of the Country had so imp--ared my Dying boddy that had I stay.dI shou.d soon (^have) been as home with my lordbut on Obeying our call to Bethlehem must undergo more in this sea journey then I expected to undergo & live five 				weeksPage 11weeks without eating. Life being justpreserv.d by Drink but on my hearingwe ware not far from land my Spirits something reviv.d & I said well to Him allthings are possible,  He can only bringto pass what I so often have begg.d of himthat my remains might rest with those of his people if not in Bethlehem yet within Philladelphia where we ariv.d the 20th of Oct.          where I was 5 Days in Dear Sister Nizers Tender nursing carewhen I began to recover by means of eating what a Doctor who was sent forhad in perticuler forbid I in these days so recover.d ? a Waggon on 27 of this instt (^to Dear Bethlehem) Here both I & our Dear DoctorOtto beliv.d I had travel.d my last pilgerjourney.  Here now I had obtain.d &gained the greatest thing I Desier.d onEarth. Often telling my only friend amDear Saviors- now I am ready to leave this Clay & sink into the sea of thy mercythen thou hast Redeem.d and Sav.d meby thy holy Blood--- here thro the Care & love of my Dear Geshwr in the Bosomof the Dr Congregation free from each Remembrance I in the Space of 20 Moths was much recover.d 				on. Page 12
On May 30. 1766 we being propos.dto visit Carrols Mannor in Marylandnow it was more plain to me why I so far recover.d to him all the things arepossible, here my decaying impar.dnature something hem.d & clog.d the the Spirit & longing of the mind forthe Salvation of my fellow Creatuers 	On June the 12. 66 we (crossed out) I with myDear Husband set of for our appointed Plan where we ariv.d on July 14Where we Aboad  6 years & 2 monthslasting sweet & bitter, rejoicing with those that rejoy.d & weeping withthose who wept- In Feb: 72 as I lay verry Ill yea was so far reduc.d that I gave up the hopes of laying torest my wore out Remaines in DearBethlehem. but out Dear Saviour everRemembering his promis of his first appering to me, hard me also herin .