V. The single Sister Mary Elisabeth Baker.
She  writes herself: I am born the 9th of June 1737
at Berlin, My Parent did their best to keep me out
of bad  Company. I often went alone to pray, but
 took myself soon better then other  People. A.o 1743
I came to the Joy of my Heart in the Children Anstalt
at Hhuth. 1746 I was among the Congregation
of the Children received. I loved our Saviour &
was taken for a pretty good Child, but as was
grown older, then I begun to feel the  Corruption of
my Heart. A.o 49 I came in the Girls Choir &
by that means in the Choir House. I was the
same year received into the Congregation.
A.o 52 I moved I came to Berlin again, where I in the
Beginning
about 1 Year went on without the  Connection of the
Congregation. After that, I instantly desireth,
they would take me in their Care again, & soon
our Saviour bestowed the Grace on me to  partake
w.th the germans there, on the holy  Communion.
A.o 57 I was receivd in the Sgg.e Sisters Choir, now
begun my Desire, to be in the Congregation again
to increase. I brought it very frequently before our
dear Saviour & upon my incessant Desire our
Sav.r made it that my Father gave me Leave
to travel to Newsalz where I 1758 arrived.
The following Year I partaketh on our Lords
Supper. From this Time the Inclination of my Heart was:
to become Jesuslike, and according to the
Desire of his Heart. A.o 1759 I emigrated with
the whole Congregation of Newsalz hither & came
in my Choir-House. By these Circumstances
our Sav.r drew nearer to my Heart, & comforted
me about all my Misery, so that I since very
 happily  proceedet. A.o 61 I was
the first time by a Choir- Communion, which had
a very  Influence upon my Heart. So far herself.
She was a very  thoughtful  Being & took
every Thing very much at Heart, But                                              
For all that her chief Object was the Conversation
w.th our dear Saviour. She became since a certain
Time a consumptic Fever & by that was full of Hope
soon to come to our Sav.r & this her Wish was fullfilled  fulfilled
to her the 29th of this Months a 10 a Clock in the
Morning as her Mouth grow pale under the Blessing
of her Choir in the 26th Year of her Age.