Heinrich Friedrich Cossart
Our dear Brother Henry Friedr.
Cossart.
As he did not write the full Account of his Life
himself, then we only can aquaint the Congregation
with the following, viz:
I am born (he writes on a Place of himself) the 20 th of Apr. 1714 at Frankfurt on the Oder,
where my Vater was Fencing Master by the Academy but dyed Anno 1715. He was born at Raven in Normandy & left France for the Sake
of his Religion, he travelled to the Isle of Jersey where he married my Mother, who by French Parents
was born in England . She died 1725 at Pomerswiz in
 Silesie by Baron de Frash.
Soon in my tender years I feeld the work of
Grace in my Heart, therefore I often wrote Letters
to our Saviour & bid my Mother to send it by the
Post. I very often prayeth to dear God with many
a Tears, to make me a Martyr, because I could
nothing greater for me imagine, as to loose my Life
for our Saviour. Anno 1730. I came to Saxonia 
& here I lost all the feeling of Grace I had in my poor Heart
again; but for all that behaved like a Gentleman,
& in the Bottom of my Heart believed nothing more
at all. Anno 1734 . I got a Call of Sr. de Ziegler 
of Renersdorf . Here I studied with great eagerness
the Languages, Philosophie & especially Moral; Seneka was my Idol on whom I hung my very
Heart, but this had its intercourses to, then
the Love of the World conquered me very
often. I frequently went to Strawalde to divert
myself, but once Curiosity inticed me in 
going home passing by to visit the Church in
 Bertholsdorf , where Magister Rothe just
preached. The Gospel of the Cross of Christ
soon conquered my Heart again & I went
to see Mr. Rothe at his own House, He recomanded
me to Herrnhuth & I came & got Leave to abide
there. So far his own Words.
Some Weeks after his Arrival the Brethren sent him to Fr. de Shweiniz to instruct his two Lady Daughters
(Our S. rs Lorel Luedcke & Lizel Marshall) which he
did wth all possible love & according to his extraordinary
Genius; Thereby he had a happy Time for his own Heart,
but always was sorry that he was so soon taken away
from the Care of the Congregation.
A o 1736. He arrived at Herrnhuth again & 1737 the
19th of Octob. he was confirmed according to the Custom
of the same Time into the Congregat.. n Soon after he
was sent to Hermsdorf as Praeceptor of the young S.r
de Schachmann with whom he got a Call to Berlin 
1738 to the Pilgrims Congregation. The Month of June
h. a. he was called to come to Mborn. & there was married 
to S t. Taillard (as to his present Widow) he was blessed in
this Marriage State w th 3 Sons & 4 Daughters, which
all are at several Places in the Congregation. Soon
of his Marriage he travelled with his Wife to Holland 
where they receivd a Comission to visit the Isle of Man 
& to deliver a Letter of the Disciple to the well-
meaning Bishops there & to make a more near Acquantaince w th Him & as Well as to see if
there is any Appearance of a Congregation, or at least
some awakened Souls on that Island. They took their
Route over Holland & London , but our B n . fell sick
on his Way by a violent Fever at Liverpool where
he was to stay for a Ship. The People there was were very
kind towards him. Amongst the rest a Awakened Man
who heard of him, came & said: that he came to
him, upon a Ordre Order of God to serve & take Care
upon him, but in the Place he must tell him
to provide for his poor Soul, because of the Danger
he was in. Our Brother very thanckfull thankful for his Love,
aquanted him, that in the Point of his Soul he was very
[eassy] & quiet, because he of his being aquainted acquianted w th .
our Saviour & can keep close to his Wounds & by that
means if he would take him from this World, he was sure
he came in his eternal Safety. This Joyfull Joyful Certainty
of our B rs . Happyness Happiness toutched touched the Heart of this Man
in such a Manner that he served him with the 
greatest Pleasure & said: that he preceived, he was 
sent hither for his own best. Our Saviour took this
Opportunity & set the Heart of this Man towards his
slaughtered Person & not long after took him happy
Home. As soon our B r . was a little better they set
out for the Isle of Man , where the was very friendly
received by the Bishop & 6 Weeks entertained in the
tenderest Maner Manner at his own House; afterwarts afterwards the 
visited the Isle but found little or nothing of a Work
of God there, they toock took their heartyly Leave by the Bishop
 
and were with a feeling of his true Love dismissed, & 
returned a.c: in the Month of Aug. over London to
 Heerendyk . From thence he was sent to Roterdam 
to M r . Blows Children.
A o . 1740 . He accompanyed accompanied B r . Gradin through France 
on his Journey to Constantinople , & by this Opportunity
made himself aquainted acquainted w th . the Prostestants Protestants at
 Lion, Nimes, Marsaille etc which was a great
Hazard to his Life. In the Time following
he came to B r . Fishers Children at Bern & had
there according to his Inclination many Occurences
to witness the Redemption by the Blood of the
Lamb with very good Effect.
A o . 1741 . He and his Wife set out for Geneva to
the Pilgrims Congregation & on the Road his
Wife was delieverd delivered of her second Son. Hujus Anni
he returned to Marienborn & from thence got
A o . 1742 . a Message to Berlin to treat of the
intended Establishment of the Brethren in
 Newshatel , where to the King most gratiously graciously 
 aggreed agreed , but some Dificultys Difficulties arose by the Classe
of Newshatel. At the End of this year he followed
the Call with his Wife to Montmirail to take
Care of the awakened Souls in that Quarter,
which he did with all possible Exactness &
every Weeks did a Journey to Newshatell 
 to visite visit the Awakened Souls there to. He was in the
mean while very busy to translate some of our public
Books into the French Language, whereof separat
Pieces to the same time have been printed.
Ao. 1744. By the Syrod at Mborn He & his Wife were
 apointed appointed for a Journey into the Dales or Valleys Vallies of the Waldensers 
to loock look after their Seed or Children how they do. They both
accepted this dangerous Enterprice w th . much Pleasure
& set out from Montmiraile the 21 st of July a.c:
Our Sav. r conducted them savely safely over the fearfull fearful 
Precipices of Mount St. Bernard . In the City of
 Aosta they met two prostestand Ladys Ladies (whereof one
lay dangerously ill & had been very much tormented
by the popish Priests to change her Religion) & he
preached her our Saviour & his bloody Attonement
for our Sins, that She resolved the very Day to set
out, & so echapped the Hands of her Prosecutors; but
before She could reach Geneve Geneva She dyed died on the Road
happy & full of Faith on the redemption of our Lord.
As he arrived at Farin our B r . deliverd his Recomentation
to the englsh Minister, but he demonstrated to him the
 Impossibilytis Impossibilities to come by the present crytical critical Con-
junctures into the [?] Valleys, & ensur'd him
that when he insist'd for this Time on his Refolution Revolution ,
he would not only bring himself, but the Waldensers
so into the utmost Dangers. Nevertheless they
continued their Journey to Pignerole and there
waited on Count de Peruse , Governor of the Castle
 of this OutPost.
of this Outpost; but he advised them to bak back to
 Turin & get there Leave, & they instead to give
'em Leave, sent them a Order which route they
have to take on their return home again.
A o . 1745 . Our B r . ventured a second time to visite visit 
the Valeys Vallies, he toock took his route through France, &
by that means visited Li on , Orange , Marseille , Nimes 
every where of them Places he wittnesses of the 
Power of the Blood of Christ & found especialy especially at Marseille 
& Nimes hungry Hearts to hear the Gospel of their
Redemptions which he deliverd delivered w th . great Freedom.
By this Occassion he had the Pleasure to met meet B r .
Nolbek at Marseille on his retour from Algier 
& was to him of real Service. From thence he
proceedeth & was on his Road wonderfully preserved
by our Saviour, then as he was walking in the
dark of Night over a shmal Bridge fell down
a Story high on a whole Bank of Steep Rocks
without any Damage. In the Month of April 
left France & carryed carried on his Journey ove Genua
 Turin & Susa & arrived happily into the Valleys Vallies .
He was aquainted acquainted that there were about 5000
People in the Valleys Vallies & had 13 Preachers among
them, with whom our B r . made himself aquainted acquainted 
& brought them the good Tidings of our dear
 Serviours Saviour's Redemption & Bloodshed & of the 
rightiousness of a poor Sinner before God by his

Blood & Suffering & so remaineth with them 10 Days.
After that he return'd over the high & rough Moun_
tain Se Col de la Croix , who is taken inpassable
& was the same Time covered w th . Shnow Snow , never-
theless there was a Watch kept of 40 Men at the very
Top of the Mountain but out Sav. r caused it, that
they saw neither him or his Guide. On this Top
he prostrated himself in the Shnow Snow before our Sav. r 
towards the Valleys Vallies & recomanted them once more
to the Mercy of our Saviour. On the other Side
of the Mountain was again a French Watch, but
went happely happily in a near Town where they kept a
Marked; & so our Br. luckely luckily passd the Simits
& arrived in France again. He witnesseth in France 
on several Places, but from Arvies he was con_
ducted by 4 Soldiers, however they did not deter
him but let him go in Peace, & so he arrived
by way of Geneve, Lausanne, after a thousend thousand 
Dangers happily at Montmirail again.
A o . 1745 he came from Montmirail to Mariendorn 
& was there at the End of the Synod ordained Deacon
of the Brethren Church, & from thence he got a Call
for England . He made a tour to Herrnhuth , Silesie 
 Polonie , where he made a Visite Visit to Bishop Sitkovies 
from thence over Berlin , Hamburg , Zeist to London .
Here he was so happy as to negotiate the Pensilvanien Act.

Act, had several Conferences w th . the Arch Bishop
& other Bishops & preached the Gospel at St. James 
in French, in the Savoy, German, & in our Chapel
english.
A o . 1747 . He received a Invitation to the Synod at
 Hhaag. On his Passage our Sav. r again protected him in a
violent Danger, then a french Caper came so near his
Ship & attackd it so warmly that whole Heaps of Balls
flew into it and damaged the Vessel very much, but happily
echappd. The very Year he returnd again w. th his Wife to
 London from thence they visited the awakened Souls in
North of England , Plymouth , & Cornwallis ; In Exeter 
a old Methodist (conversly called aed Adam) caused a Mobb Mob but out B. r by Way
of his pleasing & friendly Disposition sooth'd them again
& by that means obstructed great Misfortunes. In
general this Journey was very dangerous because of
the high Waters. This & the following Year he has
been Agent of the Brethren Unity in London , & 
had a great deal of Busyness Business . For all he made
a Intercourse & did a Journey to Irland Ireland , preachd
preach there the Gospel & visited our good old Biship Bishop 
of Man a second time. What our dear B. r did
A o . 1749 by the Act of Parliament is more then than 
worth to be remembred remembered . His indefaticable, true &
 Sorrowfull Sorrowful Activity, & the Glad & Willingness w. th which
he travlled plagued himself every Day; how he executed the most
 heavy[?] &1
heavy & intricate Commissions (but necessary for the
Safety of the Work of our Saviour) by the english Lords,
who very often in the Begin grew impatient, but were
cooled & friendly again by his humble & obliging Temper,
that he at last allways always attaineth the very Point of his
Commission. That a usefull useful Tool he was into the Hand of his
Master as well in Church as other weighty Affairs, is to too 
extensive to describe, but it is no more but reasonable
to be thanckfull thankful for him, & not to forget what our Sav. r 
has done by the Hands of our dear Brother.
In general we must of him: Nothing was to too great & heavy
& nothing to too mean & poor & well in Church Affairs,
or by Single Membres Members , or Friends, or any Person
whatsoever, it was his Pleasure to serve or oblige
them. This his peculier peculiar Disposition to help & serve,
& the good Opinion he had by any of every Body, by
whom he only could detect any Thing inclining to
Good, insnared him very often in difficult Consequences.
However if we loock look on the Basis on which his Actions
were raised, we find indeed more reason to praise &
admire then than to charge this noble character with
a Fault.
A o . 1750 He get got a an Invitation to the Synod in Barby 
& A o . 53 returned with Johannes & Charl. s Tschirsky 
through Swizerland Switzerland & France to London again & stayd
there to A o . 55 . In this Time he bought Lindsey House
& has been Agent again.
 1756 . He got a Call to Hhuth , where he stay'd this Year to rest
himself till 1757 . When he receiveth a an Invitation to
come to the Disciple in the Swizerland Switzerland & from thence
according to his Instruction set out the 24 th of Nov. 
a.c. first for France , where he visited again all his former 
 Aquaintances Acquaintances & in the Spring 1758 he Proceedeth from
 Marsaille & L ivorno into Egypt , arrive the 28 th of
May at Alexandria & the 6 th of June by our Brethren
Hocher & Pilder at Cairo ; what a an unexpected Joyfull Joyful 
News it was to them to see a Brother from the Con-
gregation there, is easily to be imagind; it contributed
not a little to B. r Hockers Recovery from his very hard
Sicknes. Our B. r visited not only the Patriarch of the
Coptes, but had to three different times Conferenzes Conferences 
with the Patriarch of the Greeks at Cairo , by whom
he got a an Opportunity to become aquainted acquainted with the
Arch-Bishop of Libien. After he made himself
several more Aquaintances Acquaintances there, by whom he took
especial Pain to get some true Account about the
Copts & Abysineers, & was by a little Sickness some
Day long more detained, he set out on Foot the 7 th of July ,
had from Rosetta to Alexandria a very difficult Road
to pass & arrived there the 4 th of August & put himself
on Board of a shweedish Swedish Ship. He had by reason of
the War a very long & dangerous Voyage, but arrived
 at last the 18 th Sept .

at last the 18 th Sept . happy at Livorno . After having past passed 
the usual Quarantine on Board, set out the Month
following for Florence , Rome , Neaple Naples , Bologne , Lorette 
& other remarquable remarkable Place of Italy , made himself
 aquainted acquainted wth several eminent Prelates of the roman Roman 
Church & found by means of his peculiar sincere &
confident Disposition, as whereby he knowed knew to insinuate
his Plan Design into their Confideration Confederation very much Ingress,
so that They [?] ensured him not only of
their respect & Love but congratulated as well
him as his Brethren with all fidelity to their
so bad Laudable & well intented intended Undertakings.
At the End of the Year 1758 he arrived at Venetia 
as from whence he wrote the following "I fell down
before the feet of my Lord & adored him very
 thankfull thankful for his all gratious gracious Guards, Safety & Mercy
bestowed on poor me this whole Year, in so many
Dangers by Sea & Land. He was in every Distress
at Hand & tented me like a fond Mother her poor weak Child.
I lay'd myself, Family & dear B. rn & Sisters anew on his
Heart in the whole World. He was very near to me &
my Heart was full of Joy about his deer dear Wounds & by
this tender feeling I slept into the New-Year; with
this firm Resolution, to remain his own Property
with whom he may do as he pleaseth.
A o . 1759 He returnd over Viena Vienna ; Praga to Hhuth 
 & had
and had the Pleasure to find himself amongst his flock
again (after a an Absence of 16 Months) & to nourish &
feed w th . them the whole following Year on unspeakable
Happyness Happiness in the Congregation.
A o . 1761 . He conducted S. r de Damniz oldest Son upon
his so sincere Desire to France , but returnd this
Year again. Afterwarts Afterwards a sudden Alteration
took Place on our B. r he became pleasing amiable
& Sinerlicke took Notice of all Remembrances of
his Brethren & was full of Tenderness, to the Heart
Toy of all his Aquaintances Acquaintances , they thought our Sav. r 
prepared him anew for the sacred Service of
his Church. All they Servants of our Church knowed knew 
his Talent very well & only waited for the right
Moment in this respect to pointed out by their
Master. But at once our Sav. r decideth, that He
would not call him from his Sabbath for more Work
again, but in his eternal Rest & Safety.
Our B. r toock took notice [?] of himself of a unusual
Weakness of his Body since last Winter, but Nobody
else could observe it because of his lively & nimble 
Temper. However he very often spoke w. th his Wife
of his going Home, & put several Things in her Mind
which he would to be done after his Departure & that a 
a good While before his last Sickness. Sometimes he
uttereth to her: Weak as you are, it is very possible that 
I go home before you. His last sickness begun
 the 17 th 

the 17 th of Apr . but the 19 th was still at the meeting Hall in Hope
to enjoy once more w. th his Choir our Lords Supper,
but could not hold it out & was forced to go home &
partake it w. th his Wife. 
They following Days he grew better & the 29 th he
 toock took a Walk again; but the 2 d . of May in the
Night a sudden Pleuresie set on him, that Nobody
thought he could live till Morning. On all Sign
could be observed that he was ready to go, & when
Others made some Hope of his Recovery, his
Heart thought quite reverse. He was by his
excessive Pain full of Love, friendly & patient,
that it was a Heart Pleasure to behold him.
He begged & desireth by every B. r & Sist. r who
visited him, to love him & think on him
before our dear Saviour. He himself amused
himself w. th his dear & bloody redeemer in
 Sylence Silence . Once he sigheth: Deine Marter
Angst und Stich, O Herr Jesu trösten
mich! The excessive Heat surrounded his Senses,
but asoon any Body spoke to him, he directly
was present to himself; & so he continued to
the 7 th in the Afternoon between one & two a Clock
when he w. th the Blessings of the Congregat. n (which
 B. r Leonhard beflowed on him) went in Peace
to his dear Lord, after 49 years, of his Pilgrimage.

