Personals of our d.r deceased Brother George Jacob
Engelbach who departed to the Joy of his Lord at Herrnhuth
the 12th of November 1768. The account he has left behind
is as follows:
Nothing but obedience moves me to give an account of my
Path thro  through this dying Life. I had rather be Unknown and un=
=noticed, to all but that loving heart beyond compare!
to be known to him is all my wish and desire.
I was born the 24th of October 1709 at Auenheim a Village near
the Rhine, in which Place my Father was Parson. My Mothers maiden
Name was Michaelis and descended from Polish Lissa. In the year 1711
myself and a younger Brother was deprived of our Father in our Tenderesh
Infancy. After 3 years Widdowhood my Mother Married an Intendant of the
Finaces named Aulber Aulber who removed in the year 1716 to Bussweiler         
where he became Councellor  Counselor of the Finaces. Here I was sent to the
Gymnasium where I saw and heard much evil, and as I grew older became
sensible of the Hurt it was to me, myself my own Brother, my Step Brother and
a Relation of ours a Minesters  Ministers Son, soon found out that we was utterly corrupt=
ed children. We 4 join'd together in a Resolution to give our Hearts to the Lord
Jesus, often we rose before day, went out into the Fields, kneelt  knelt down on our
knees Weept  Wept and pray'd for better Hearts. As we saw no help for us it came
in our Minds to go into the thickest Forrest  Forest to feed on grass and pray day
and Night, that our poor Souls might be saved; But the severe and cruel
treatment we met with from our Masters shifted every thing. It is true
that from time to time, we often felt anew the drawings of divine grace
and I remember with shame and Bowedness, what my heart felt whenever
I read or heard any thing of our Saviour and his bleeding wounds, that
presently melted my heart and Draw tears from my Eyes; Yet the in=
=dwelling Evil, and the outward Descations which surrounded me seemd
to render my Conversion an Impossibility. Therefore I thought I would
trust in the Lords long suffring; and hope that the Lord Jesus who once
for all had suffer'd death for me, would not suffer the Merrits  Merits of his
bitter Passion to be lost on me, But would receive me to his
his Mercy at the End of all Distress, as he did the Penitent Thief. In the
Year 1726 I was sent to the University at Strassburg; In the year 1727
to Jena and 1728 to Wittenberg. Here that Corruption broke loose like
a Deluge, which had hither to been restrain'd by the Laws Severity,
and I ran blindly into Sin, the wages of which quickly follow'd; some=
=times I wept and cried to Jesus for deliverance, but Sin became still
more Sinful, till at length I was litterally  literally the express Picture of
the Prodigal Son! and in the Year 1730 I actually set out for home
with these Thoughts: I will return to my severe Step Father; he may if
he pleases make me his Servant! To such a pass I was come!
Oh thou Merciful Lamb! thou has taken a poor Creature indeed to
thy Mercy! I was immediately put under the care of a Man who
had formerly been our House Preceptor, but was now become Parson
in a Country Village, who continued his usual rigorous treatment of
me. At length I grew weary of the distress which Sin occasioned
humbled myself, and beg'd the Lord Jesus for support, would fain
have been converted but knew not where to begin, and to my Sor
=row had no one to Inform me. I came into works, pray'd and
wept, yet sin not being brought under thro  through the Blood of Jesus con
=tinued to rage the more in heart. In the year 1731 I was sent
to the Seminary of the Candidates to the Pastoral Office and was
a Teacher in the Gynmnasium. O that I had but then been ac
=quainted with my Bleeding Redeemer perhaps I should have been
of Service to the Youth under my care as they all loved me.
In the Year 1733 I receivd ordination to a Preacher of the Gosple  Gospel
and in the Year 1734 was introduced as Deacon at Ingweiler
and teacher at Ripperhweiler. The office of a Teacher was weighty
to me, I was truely  truly Sensible of my unworthyness  unworthiness and innability inability
knew not which way to turn, pray'd frequent and fervently and
yet continued unconverted, was forever Restless wept in private
before the Lord Jesus and beg'd for Mercy; my poor distress'd
heart cleav'd to him, and nothing was more pleasing to me than
to preach of his Death and bleeding wounds, which I allways  always did
                                                                                                            with

[page break]

with great Emotion, well knowing nothing but Jesus blood and wounds
could sanctify me poor wretched and corrupted Man; and I experi=
=enced, that the word of his Suff'rings was thunder which shoock  shook
my Soul and the Souls of my hearers. After I had been 16 Weeks at
Ingweiler, I receiv'd a call to cron=Weissenburg, I should have gone
thither a year before, but as I was only ask'd wether  whether I had a Mind
to go there, and was not duely voted I thought I was free to refuse,
and parson Heinold came there in my stead. I had rather have
stay'd in a Mean Village and known to few, but as I observ'd it was
the Lords will, I concluded to accept the call, altho  although I should follow
my dear Step Brother Aulbern to his grave, who had been senior Aulber
in that city and dy'd in the Epedemical Fever which then rag'd
there. With the disposition of heart and Mind I went thither in 
February 1735. The largeness of the City, the number of Sick and
abundance of Labour I saw prepared for me made me Tremble, and I
shall never forget with what a feeling, and with how many Tears I entred  entered
into my office. In April 1756 I married my Step B.r Shillers Widdow  Widow
I knew not how to conduct myself according to our Saviours Mind in a 
Married State, notwithstanding we lived cheerful and happy together
in our way, and every Body regarded us as a Happy Pair. In
February 1737 our Saviour gave us a Daughter Marie Margaretta
and 13 Months after took her to himself in the Small Pox. In
the same Year a Neghbouring Doctor of Physick sent me a
Treatise against the Cong.n Hymns. I look'd it thro  through and was for
the first time convinced that such a people existed. At first I thought
these are Schwenkfields descendants, if their doctrine is false, it
will evaporate Gods Word, and Luthers doctrine will never be
abolish'd. But I found so much of Jesus Blood and Wounds in
these Hymns, that I was quite doubtful what to think, yea was quite
confused for I could not remember that I had ever read in Church
History of a People that keept  kept to the word of Jesus Patience.
                                                                                                      And

and as my poor Heart, notwithstanding its Corruption was always 
soften'd and my Eyes swam in Tears whenever I read of Jesus Suffring
for the Sins of the World, I felt the same Emotion at reading these Hymns
and had a desire to hear more of these people, and this I obtain'd
by means of my dear deceased Uncle Councellor  Counselor Engelbach who
was in Connexion  Connection with the Brn: I intreated him to send a Br.
to me and in the year 1749 Old Brother Gold came at My Request
to my House on his Journey thro  through Our City. This Simple Country
Man was a great Blessing to me. He look'd cheerful and happy, that
I was not, and myself made confidence in Jesus Merrits  Merits would not
stand the Test, nor quiet the uneasiness of my heart. After this
the Brn: freqeuntly calld to see me and when they was gone my
Conclusion was I am not like them, I do not know our Saviour.
I wept and pray'd and conferr'd with my Colleague Pastor Reinold but
receiv'd poor comfort, often I stretch'd myself in the Dust and
beg'd our Saviour to look graciously on me, but in the Midst
of my groans and Lamentations it was as tho  though a Voice within me said
arise, you are not in Earnest, If I give you Honour, and leave you
in your High Life, then I may be your Saviour of choice, but it
would not suit you to forgo all things for my sake, so as I have
for your sake. I felt the Truth of this Reproach, and must be
Silent. Mean time the uneasiness of my Soul still increas'd
I began to mourn and lament again, but as it allways  always turns
out Fruitless; the Enemy put it in my Mind that I was a 
cast away, our Saviour neither would, nor could be Merciful
to such a sinner. This went so far that I was actually be=
=tween Atheism and Desperation. I could no longer Pray
but wherever I turn'd cried out: Oh Jesu Oh Jesu! The 26th
of October 1744 when my distress seemd to be at the highest 
Pitch, I was reading the French News Paper, and all at once
I was struck with these words which seemd as tho  though they was
spoke in my heart: canst thou read that, and hast no
                                                                            Saviour
                                                                                   This

[page break]

This shock'd me so, that I let the Paper fall out of my Hands and
fell after it to the Earth. I had no utterance for words, but wept
for Mercy, and gave myself intirely  entirely up to our Saviour without
the least limitation, that with me he might do, whats pleasing
in his sight, and from me take whatere  whatever he will, whatere  whatever he
thinks not right. To me it was as tho  though I then receiv'd permission
to kiss the Prints of the Nails in his sacred Feet! I felt a Di=
=vine assurance of the forgiveness of my Sins, and the covenant I then
made, is still sure and firm, my heart is no longer mine, but His.
I shall not say much of what follow'd this change. The want of
a true poor Sinner heart often caus'd me to commit great failings.
The Awaken'd Souls keeping to me, Brought on me the displeasure of the
School Master, My Colleague, the Mayor of the City and all the Mages=
=tracy of the Lutheran Side, One Honest Councellor  Counselor excepted. The
Process at Strassburg D.r Froereisen would have me turn'd out of my
Office by the Civil Magistrates, and so it went on, till the year 1748.
Mean time our Saviour gave me more oppertunitys  opportunities of becoming acquainted
with the Brn: and in the year 1747 I made a 12 days visit at
Herrnhaag to my great Blessing. I was soon convinced that I be=
=longed to this People, but how, or when, my dear Saviour would
bring me thither, that I did not dare to Consider on, this I knew;
it must thro  through a Miracle, otherwise it could not come to Pass. After
this Blessed Visitation, the Enemy grew more inraged  engraged, and I became
a detestation to the whole City except the Awakend Souls; but my
heart was chearful  cheerful and happy, I supplicated and obtain'd of my
dear Lord a Promise, which was a great Consolation to me. In Au=
=gust 1749 my dear Wife took to her Bed, and in this her last Ill=
=ness she felt she was a wretched Sinner, begd for Mercy and openly
confess'd she had sought the World more than our Saviour, and
fell asleep with this fervent wish: Shelter my Soul most gra=
=ciously within thy open'd Side; In the 36 year of her age.
                                                                                     As
as I observ'd above, I had obtain'd a promise from our dear Saviour
that I should come to his People, but that did not come to pass till
the year 1756. In the year 1751 I came to Treweiler as Chaplain
and Inspector. Here at length the Hour of my deliverance 
struck. I was severly taken to task for my Conexion  Connection with the Brns
Cong.n and after several storms I was required to seperate myself
from them, to quit The Herrnhuters Errors, to deny the People of
God and condemn their Doctrine. This I could not do, but chose
rather to bear the Reproach of Christ and was also removed, and
sat out for Newwied in the Year 1756. Here I became partak-
=er of the Cong.n Grace and the same year attaind to the Parti=
=cipation of the Greatest Good in the Holy Sacrament, with the
Cong.n The Next Year I receiv'd a Call from the Countess to
be her Chaplain and to preach a Sermon every Sunday at
her Chapple  Chapel, which I accepted with the Consent of my Brn:
and continued in this office untill  until the year 1759 In which year
I attended the Disciples Household which spent some weeks to
all and Particularly to my great Blessing at Newwied and went
with them to Holland. Shortly before Christmas I returnd with the
same hither to Herrnhuth and removed into my beloved Choir House
in which during an abode of near 4 years I have had the Happiness
to enjoy Numberless Blessings and Benifits  Benefits.
Thus far his own Words
By reason of the Vacancy at Berthelsdorff occasion'd by the death
of Br. Groh our d.r Brother often preach'd there with great Blessing
so as he likewise frequently Preach'd here in Herrnhuth on Sundays.
In the Fall of the year 1763 he receiv'd a call to preach the Gosple  Gospel
at the little church in Altona which he cheerfully accepted of from
our Saviours Hands and sat our for that place in September.
His much blessed service in the Gosple  Gospel at that Place our Brn and
Sisters have heard in the Journals. His Sermons was so much fre=
=quented that Room often faild the Hearers, And we have many
                                                                                             living

[page break]

being witnesses which prove that his Testimony was attended with Spirit
and power. In the Year 1767 he visited the Directorey at Zeyst
where he stayd 2 Months to his great Blessing as he has expres'd both
verbally and in his Letters. Towards the Latter end of June this year
He came hither with our d.r Lords Approbation for to rest and refresh
himself. He enterd his Choir House in a weakly state of Body but
with Joy and thankful Tears, moved into his former Chamber, com=
=mended himself to his Brns: Love and Favour and told them our
Saviour would prepare and soon take him to Rest. He was very
tender and Affectionate and saluted every Br he saw with much
Love. Often express how happy he was in living among his People
and injoying  enjoying all good things in the Lords House daily. He never
miss'd the Meetings notwithstanding his weakness often keept  kept the
Morning and Evening Meetings in his Choirs house and spoke tender
Evangelical with such Brn as he was particularly accquainted  acquainted with
and was Legitamated as a faithful Heart towards our Saviour and
the Brn. His Heart was devoted to our Saviour, and attach'd to his
Suffrings as a poor Sinner, and cleav'd to him with Body and
Soul. Often this Expression was dropt  dropped from his Lips: Oh that Mer=
=ciful and Long Suffring heart of Jesus! O that Merciful and long
Suffring Heart. The 8th of October he was at the Love feast and
the Holy Sacrament. The next day it appeard plainer that he
would not continue here much Longer, he set his outward afairs  affairs
in order that he might be quite easy in regard to what he should
leave behind him. The 10th he joyfully took to his Bed and be-
=gan to speak fervently to our Saviour and said with numberless
Tears: Oh thou most beloved Heart! Merciful Long Suffring and of
great Goodness and Truth; Oh Lord Jesus how shall I sufficiently
thank thee; I am not worthy of such Love grace and Benifits  Benefits
which thou has bestow'd on me. After a little pause he resumed
his Disourse which had been interrupted by the Floods of Tears
which flow'd from his Eyes and concluded with this verse Oh
did each Pulse thy Praises beat, each breath my thankfulness repeat.
                                                                                                    He
 He spent his time in earnest longing to be with his beloved Jesus
His Memory had been for some time pretty much weaken'd and he seldom
attended to what was talk'd off, But when the Discourse turn'd to heart
Matters, he was presently cheerful and attentive expressing himself in
such a Manner that it was a pleasure to hear him  He believ'd his most
beloved and Faithful Friend would soon call him to his Presence, and
would not take any Medicines: Sayings nothing keeps me and nothing
helps me Yet when he was perswaded  persuaded not to refuse the Application
of Medicines intirely  entirely, then he was childlike and said do what you
will with your poor Engelbach you are good Bretheren, Oh you give
yourselves so much trouble I know it very well and am sorry for it
I will be obedient but you must have a great deal of Patience with
me. Often he pour'd out his heart before our Saviour and repeated
incessantly this Request  Oh take me hearts beloved Saviour there is
nothing between us we understand each other I am ready. After
the Injoyment  Enjoyment  of the Holy Sacrament on the 5th Instant he
counted the days and hours and sigh'd in a moving Manner
come dear Saviour come and take me. The Oppression at his
Breast deprived him of the freedom of Speech but he was attentive to
all that pass'd and made signs and smild on the Brn: that
came to see him in which manner he likewise express'd his
desire to receive the Last Blessing, and with great difficulty
pronounced the words: He hastens! The 12th at noon he folded
his Hands and received the Blessing of the Cong.n and his Choir
and God. With the verse: Now let his Mouth Expiring on thy
dear Breast recline &ca his Breath stopd and he fell
sweetly assleep  asleep leaving a fine look on his Countenance
Aged 59 Years 19 days.

 