Personals of our Worthy Brother John Friedrich
Gocht who departed this Life the 31st. of January 1769. at
Herrnhuth. He left the following written Account of his Path
I was born at Nieder Oderwiz the 30th. of December 1697 and
brought up by my Parents to all good. From my Infancy I had
no Talent for the World, yet my Corruption lay the deeper. In
time I had an insight into the Holy Ghosts seeking my heart
which I then did not understand. At length I became concernd
for my Salvation, more particularly in my 14th. Year when I
partook the Holy Sacrament the first time at which I shed many
Tears. After this I came into a Light wordly minded way and 
went on some Years under Divine Patience, Till Divine Love
Touch'd my Heart, and convinced me of my unbelief in the time
of Lent 1719. In the Passion Week my Continual Prayer was,
that our Saviour would have Mercy on me, and grant me the
Benifit  Benefit of his Precious Blood Shedding. My Request that he
would graciously Pleased to look favourably on me was granted
and I receiv'd Comfort, It came in my Mind that I could be helpd
if I would apply to our Saviour as a poor Sinner. But the Sinner
=ship was a Mystery, I rather employ'd myself in Reading and An=
=xious seeking. To this was added thy intention to Marry.
After praying to God to give me a Person wholly devoted to him, I married
the 19th. of Novemr. 1723 |:the present Widdow  Widow:| Our Saviour bless'd us
with 3 Sons and 1 Daughter, but has taken Them all 4 to himself
I endeavourd to the Uttmost of my Power to act up to the best of my know=
=ledge, yet my heart was without feeling, untill  until Eternal Love brought
a Text of Scripture to my Mind at the time I was employ'd in my
Business the Text was this: as many as are led by the Spirit they are the Sonsof God. This caus'd me great Concern. I pray'd and Sigh Shew me
thy ways O Lord that I may walth  walkth in thy Truth! He answerd me I will
direct thee and shew the way thou shalt go, I will guide thee with my
Eyes. About this time there was a great awakning at Oderwitz which
I would fain have joind, but at first, fear of Man gave me much
trouble, yet I was convinced in my heart that I should find what
I sought. I went to Berthrelsdorff and heard Pastor Rothe preach
|:which I had done once before:| and in his Sermon he gave me
such a plain description of my State of Soul as tho I had before
told him of it. And now the perscecution  persecution began which did not
terrify me, I felt peculiar Grace in my heart, and had I remaind
in my Simplicity, I should have avoided many a heavy hour
But instead of that I came into self Workings, I went to the Parson
and told him my whole State he often told me I was in the right
way I should only pray to God to bring me further in his Grace 
but no sooner did he see that I conversed with souls who were
convinced how wrong their former Life had been then he indea-
=vourd to hinder me all he could. The Meetings at Oderwitz
was forbidden, and a great Number was Arrested and taken to
Zittau. As I was much concern'd about these people I went a
few days after to enquire wether  whether they were set at Liberty or
not. Just as I came to Gottlieb Webers House 2 Men laid
hold of me and would carry me before a Justice, not knowing
for what cause, I refused to comply, they broke their Sticks
over my head and so evil intreated me that I fell to the Earth
without Sensce  Sense or Motion, a Number of People being gatherd the
Men made off, as soon as I came to myself my first thought
was:Lord forgive them. I went home and felt very happy
The Next day I could scarce hold up my Head for Pain. I now
keept  kept quiet at home and only went now and then to Church
some time after the Lord of the Place sent an Officer to bring me
before him and ask'd me, wether  whether I acknowledged the Articles
                                                                                                        deliverd

[page break]

at Zittau against The Clergy. I could not then do otherwise
but Answer Yes. Hereupon he committed me to Prison. I was
quite alone there, and was often ask'd if I would not change my
Mind, but I could not. The Justice tried the Serpents Wisdom and
told me I should only Ask Pardon and all would be well. I was in a 
great Strait yet promised to do so. An Officer brought me then to
the Parson to Ask his Pardon. I thought with my tongue I will do
it, but my Heart shall not give its Consent. But no sooner had
the Words pass'd my Lips then my Distress was greater than I can
Express. I begd and pray'd Oh dearest Saviour! do not cast me off
forever. I went to the Parson and told him how I felt since my
Rescinding, that the blessed Application of Jesus Merrits and death
to my heart, was now quite gone and Vanish'd He tried to make
me easy by saying It would be all well again in a short time
soon After Notice was given me by An Officer sent from the
Lord of the Place, That I should in a short time leave the Town
I went to Herrnhuth and found there an Habbitation  Habitation. In August
1728 I moved thither with my Family altho with a Wounded and
grieved Heart, and went on in my Misery and Distress above
3 Years, and then My heart was Softened and Melted thro the
Love and Grace of the faithfull  faithful Friend of Sinners so that I
had some hopes of Comfort. One Morning when I took my
little Anna Rosina out of Bed I ask'd her what Verse she would
give me, and she repeated such a Sweet Comfortable one
that my Heart was enlarged so that I could lay myself as a poor
lost Sinner at the Feet of Jesus and find all the Blame in me
then I found enough cause to be a Sinner and obtained an insight
into the bleeding and Sacrifice of Jesus in which alone I could obtain
Grace Mercy and forgiveness of Sins. Soon after the dear Disciple
sent for me and ask'd me wether  whether I was willing to be in a Band
which Br. Tobias Friedrick keept  kept? This I look'd upon as a great
                                                                                                Favour
and our Saviour oppend  opend my Heart which was formerly seald up so
that I could tell my whole Situation. I likewise obtaind the unspeak
=able Favour to partake the Holy Sacrament with the Congregation
That was a happy Moment. I look'd on myself as a poor Sinner who
obtaind Salvation purely out of free Grace and Mercy and com=
=mended myself to the failthful care and Protection of our dear
Saviour, and the Maternal Tuition of the Holy Spirit. when I
arose in the Morning my first thoughts were O that I might neither
think speak or hear of any thing but thy Love and thee, and his
Grace lead me happily, yet still a time came wherin  wherein I felt myself
so cold and in such dryness that I staid  stayed away from the Holy Sacra
=ment. I was much troubled and beg'd our dear Saviour for forgive
=ness, and he again bless'd me with his Peace. Just then the Word
for the Day was, Ye Husbands pray without doubting My Prayer
was. O let me in thy Nail prints see, my Pardon & Election free
and I heard the Blessed words in my Heart: behold I have gra=
=ven thee in the Palms of my Hands. In the Year 1736 I
was admitted among the hourly Intercessors. Then I experienced
what that is to be with the Spouse quite lonely and to pray for
the whole Congn. Yea for our dear Saviours whole Kingdom.
3 Years after I became Sick Waiter. I beg'd our Saviour to give me
wisdom and an humble lowly Sinner Heart I was in this
Important Office near 10 Years and perform'd it with great Will
=ingness. In the Year 1741 the Priesterly Office of Night Watch
=man came to be my Lot. My Bodily Weakness made me
at first somewhat Scrupelous  Scrupulous but I soon recolected  recollected the Congn.
has apointed  appointed the to it, if it is our dear Saviours Will that 
thou shalt serve him in this Office he will give the Strength
to execute it, I therefore undertook it in his Name on the
7th. of August I resign'd myself to our Saviours Grace and the
Angels Protection: And our dear Saviour gave me his poor
Sinner who had nothing but his Grace to feel and see that 

[page break]

He was with me and supported me. Soon after the Office of
Congn. Desciples  Disciples being introduced My Wife and I had the
favour of being the first Married Pair that had this
Priesterly Honnour  Honour this bow'd my heart in Dust before our
Saviour. And Since then, as Often as I have had the fa=
=vour of being Congregation or Choir Disciple, My heart
has enjoyd a new Blessing and my Cheeks has been wetted
with Sinner Tears. In the Month of June 1760 such
a Weakness came over me, that I was obliged to resign
my important Office of Watchman in Herrnhuth the 15th.
of June being the last Night in which I watch'd. My
Weakness increas'd so, that I was in great hopes I should
soon depart from this Vale of Tears, but that Hour is not
yet come. I have been obliged to miss many fine Meetings it
is true yet his sweet Nearness has often made me many a
Happy Hour in my Chamber the 15th. of February 1762 I had
a most peculiar Hour of Grace which I no more expected in
this Life, which was that Br. Gregor surrender'd the Con=
=gregation Discipleship to me in my Sick Chamber It was
as tho a Stream of Mercy and Grace was pourd out over me
and I receiv'd that favour with Sinner Shame & bowedness
and with many Tears! Thus far his Own Words.
Our dear Brothers Charactor  Character is known to the whole Congregation.
He was indeed a faithful Heart, quite in Love with the most
Fairest and Beauteous Saviour He was Legitimated as such
and we can give him the Attestation of his being a true
Liturgus. He pray'd without ceasing, and made it his
real concern to Commend to our dear Lords Blessing and
Protection the increase of his Kingdom The whole Brns told

 the Congregation and Choirs and especially the Directorium. He
often express'd how weighty the Office of Watchman had been
to him. Thro our Saviours Grace every Night for 19 Years
he watchd Pray'd and perform'd the High priestly office of off=
=ring  =ering the Incense of Tears & Supplications and edified the
Congn. with his agreeable Singing which has often been a means
to make Strangers praise the Name of the Lord, He has refreshd
the Sick in their sleepless Nights and reminded them of the 
faithful Keeper of Israel the Watchman of Soul & Body. The
more this Office was of Weight to him, the greater was his Grief
that his weakly Body obliged him to give the Post of Watchman
to the Congn. He then went on his Path in Converse with the
Man of Sorrows which shorten'd the days of his waiting at the
healing Ponds. About 3 Months ago he was out the last
time and refresh'd his Heart at the Post Communion in the
Hall. Since then he spent his time in Stillness hoping and 
Longing for departure and as often as he was askd how he
found himself his Answer was that he was happy in the Wounds
of Jesus- The 31st. of January his last Hour aproachd  approachd
Br. John Nitschman held him a much blessed Liturgy 
and imparted to him the Blessing of the Congn. and his
Choir- During the Singing Hour his Soul took its flight
to Jesus Arms and Bosom and left the Body a fine Priestly
Countenance after have dwelt in this Mortal Tent near
72 Years. -
 