Life of the married Sister Johannah Eleono-
ra Benade, who departed this life
at London January 7th 1792
She has left the following written Account
measuring her course thro this life.
I was born October 22d 1756 at Eubau (Iboro)
in Upper Lusatia & baptized the 26th in the
Lutheran Church. My dear Parents, who led
a pious life, and as members of the Brethren's
Society visited diligently at Herrnhut, dedi-
cated me to the Lord from my birth, and en-
deavored to educate me as well as the rest of
their Children only for Him. They were very
careful to preserve us from bad Company;
for which reason our faither instructed us him-
self in reading, writing and cyphuing _
In my early infancy the holy Ghost evidenced
his labor upon my heart. I still remember,
when I was but 4 Years old, that seeing my
mother pray to our Saviour, and hearing how
she thanked Him for his blithe sufferings,
I kneeled down by her and wept aloud _
In my 7th Year my Parents took me fre-
quently to Herrnhut, where I had opportu-
nity to visit the Children in the Oeconomy
and was greatly delighted, when they taught me
[?]erses and times; yea, I left them always with
reluctance, when my parents returned home,
and begged my Father, to let me stay with such
happy Children, who told me so much of our
Savior. He replied: if I would entreat our Savior
for it, he would certainly hear me, which I did
in good earnest. About this time I got the
small pox, and nobody expected I should re_
cover; however, in a short time I was restored.
But having had a small pox in the eye, it
made my eye sore for a whole year, & I was in
great danger of losing it; at length however
it was happily cured. In my 8th Year my dear
mother being delivered of her 8th Child, died in
consequence of it. In her last illness she gave
us still many good admonitions, and on the
last day of her life, having desired her 4 Child_
ren, that were still living, to come to her bed_
side, she entreated every one of us in the most
affecting manner, to surrender our whole heart
to our Savior, and not to forsake him all the
days of our life, to do all we did in his name,
and to bring all our concerns, great & small, in
prayer before Him; thus we all shou'd fare well.
Her happy departure made a deep impression
upon us and upon all, that were present
Weak as she was, she would be helped out of bed,
                                                                         in
in order to render upon her knees cordial tha[?]
to our Savior for all the mercy & faithfulness,
she had experienced from Him & to recommend
her Children unto Him for the last time in
this vale of tears. Soon after she departed hap_
pily as a reconciled Sinner ~
My oldest Sister - S.r Rose in Labrador -
undertook to act mother's part towards me &
my youngest Brother and bestowed much care
& faithfulness upon us, for which may our
Savior reward her abundantly.
At Whitesentide in 1764 my father took me
again to Herrnhut on a visit; and being brought
to the Girls' Oeconomy, I entreated S.r Benigna
von Watteville - now Bruiningk - to receive me
now as an Inhabitant into the house, because
my desire was to become a happy Child, and
had often prayed our Savior with tears, to grant
me this favor. She gave me an opportunity,
to address the Brethren of the Directory, just
then met in Conference, telling them my re_
quest in all Simplicity; upon which they took
it immediately into consideration, & to my in_
expressible joy my petition was granted.
June 12th 1764 I moved into the Girls' Oeconomy,
where I spent the remainder of my Childhood
happy & cheerful and with an abiding blessing
for all the days of my life. There was in general
[??]r that time a blessed Course among the Child_
ren and I can never think of it without parti_
cular gratitude both to our Savior & to my
father, who regarded no expence  expense to have me
secured from the Seduction of the world.
By degrees I came into a very familiar inter_
course with the Friend of Children, & I scarcely
closed a day without begging our Savior's pardon
for all that might have grieved him in the course
of the day. On our festival the 17th of Aug.
1767 I received such an extraordinary im_
pression of our Savior's great love towards me,
that my heart was melted into tears, & it was
to me, as though I had really beheld our Sa_
vior on the corss. Another time the Cong.n
being met for the Lord's Supper, I heartily in_
treated our Savior, to give me a share of the
blessing, which the adult Brn & Srs were now
enjoying - for I had a very high notion of the
Lord's Supper, having seen that my parents,
whenever they went to it, were particularly af_
fected and in that hour our Saviour appeared
to the eyes of my Spirit, as having a little Child
upon his arms and blessing it, which filled
my heart with joy.
March 25th 1769 I was received among the
great Girls, on which occasion I surrendered
myself anew to our Savior, recommending
                                                             my
my future course to Him & His holy Spirit
with particular concern, because I knew very
well that my happy Childhood, in which I had
not felt much of misery & sinfulness, was now
past. But still I went on in my childlike course
for a whole Year, & was received into the Cong.n
July 2d 1769. But now I learnt  learned in the School
of the holy Ghost gradually to discover the
wretchedness & corruption of human nature.
Being still under the same faithful care as
formerly and not exposed to see or to hear any
thing bad, I could not comprehend at first
why I could no longer look upon things with
the same simplicity, and converse with our
Savior with the same childlike confidence as
formerly; and seeing my Companions cheerful,
I imagined that I alone was such an un_
happy Creature, and wept day & night over my
sinfulness. But our Savior granted me the
spirit of uprightness, that I could speak with
my Laboress about every wrong idea who made
it plain to me that this was a period of grace
and of the blessed Labor of the holy Ghost;
which greatly strengthened my confidence
to our Savior. I was also richly comforted by
him and recovered my former cheerfulness.
Meanwhile my Father was married a second
time and Gnadau being fixed upon as his fu_
ture place of abode: it was thought proper,
that he should take his Children with him,
both for his assistance & for their further edu_
cation. March 17th 1770 we arrived in Gna_
dau. This place was then in its first begin_
ing; not only the outward Subsistance was
difficult, but there was also a want of spiri_
tual encouragement, which made me regret
Herrnhut very much & occasioned some re_
missness in my course. But when the first
6 single Sisters arrived at Gnadau & with them
a Laboress of a motherly heart, who took parti_
cular care of me: I experienced a blessed revi_
val and March 20th 1771 I was admitted to
the h. Com.n which proved a great blessing
to me. In November 1772 my dearly beloved
Father departed happily in the 68th Year of
his Age. I attended him much in his last
illness. His hearty and childlike prayers to
our Savior, when he imagined to be alone,
his anointed conversation about the bitter
Sufferings and death of Jesus and even his
talk when absent in his mind, testifying
that his heart was full of this matter, left
                                                             a
a blessed impression upon my heart. After
his departure I fell upon my knees & entreated
our Savior, to take me as a f[???] Orphan under
his special Care and to enably me by his grace
to follow the steps of my Father. I now moved
into the Sisters house, where we labored under great
diss[???] outwardly, having frequently no
work; but the inward [????] was truly pleasing
and I can remember, that frequently a posti_
[???] emotion took place, when but a few
[???] were singing for an [????] blessing.
In 1774 I was received among the single
Sisters, and on that day remembered my Covenant
with our Savior, thanking him at the Same
time for all the mercy & faithfulness I had
[???????] hitherto. In 1776 I came to
him at Barby, where I could make a com_
fortable [???]hood, which I looked upon as
a gracious answer to my Prayer, which I
had often [???] up to our Savior in my needy
[????????]. But it was also a blessed
time for my heart. The holy Ghost led me
farther into the [????] knowledge of my_
self & gave [???] to see my [????] & sinfulness
in the true light. How did [??] suffer me to
[???] and to [????] [????], but filled my
heart with inexpressible comfort and [???]
It was now my chief concern, to have a full en_
joyment of the maritorious life, sufferings and
death of our Savior and to apply his merits to
my individual Case.
In process of time I conceived a doubt, whether
I had really experienced the new birth of the heart,
and I would often by weeping and praying ex_
tort, as it were, some ocular demonstration
of it; but our Savior's will was, I shou'd believe,
without seeing. Some time after it happened
at the holy Communion, at the pronouncing
of those Words: This is my body, which is
given for You, that they entered like a dart
into my Soul, as if somebody said: yes, for
thee, out of love to thee he has given himself
into death. Than it was, that my heart
was melted like wax at the fire, the eyes
run with tears of love and gratitude, yea
I thought, I could lik lie for hours together
at his feet weeping grateful tears. The ma_
jesty and greatness of God our Savior on one
hand and my poverty and unworthiness on 
the other were set before me in such a con_
trast, that I appeared unto myself as the
most insignificant Creature and yet I had
such a full assurance of his having given
himself into death for me, that I was abund_
                                                          antly
antly comforted, & from that time no more de_
sired my ocular demonstration. I went on
for a considerable time in the blessed form of
mind, and took a daily hour to [????] with
our Savior about all my [???]. As long as
I faithfully kept to it, and suffered no busi_
ness to in[???], I continued in a happy [???]
and no coldness took place between Him & me
yea our Savior frequently granted me such un_
expected visitations of grace, that I [???] not
have taken the whole world in [????] for
my happiness.
How a desire was raised in my Soul: Oh
that I could testify my love and gratitude
to my good Lord! Oh that I could s[???] him
in the heart for All he has done to me! & at
times my heart was so burning with love,
that I thought I would not regard my own
life, but sacrifice it willingly for our Savior.
However I did not as yet discover this desire
of my heart; but soon after I was appointed
house Servant in the Sister's Choir, which was
an agreeable employment to me. I likewise
served 7 Years as Hall Servant with muc pleasure.
In 17[?]2 I was desired, to begin a School with
[?] Children, for which I felt no great [???]_
nation at first, being well aware, that it is
a difficult and important Charge, requiring
much patience and wisom, to act towards
the Children in such a manner, as to give them
no offence  offense, but rather prove a blessing to them.
Self-love also suggested the thought: hitherto
thou couldst go on unobservedly, but now
thou wilt be exposed to the criticisms of others.
However I was heartily ashamed of it & thought:
what a poor Creature am I? I vowed, to sacri_
fice my life for our Savior, and now, when it
comes to the point, I raise objections. Thus
then I accepted the proposal with an obedient
and willing mind, and can say with truth,
that this employment has proved a great
blessing to my own heart. Our Savior has
numberless times blessed me for the Children's
sake, and at the same time I had an oppor-
tunity to improve in self-knowledge.
Whener my heart was not clear & cheer-
ful, Schooling became bothersome to me
and I was necessitated to beg for new grace.
Likewise my endeavors about the Children
frequently led me to think, how much
trouble our Savior had with me, to keep
me in the right way.
Of that time there is still one day worthy
                                                           to
be remember'd by me as a distinguished day
of blessing. I mean the 4th of May, when it was
50 Years since the single Sisters had made this
first Covenant. When we kept the Lord's Sup-
per at the close of the day, and I renewed that
Covenant with our Savior, which I had made
so often with him, to seek for nothing in the
world, but how I might be His with soul &
body, with an earnest desire, that each drop
of blood might be devoted to Him; I felt the
peace of God in such a manner, that I was
fully assured, He himself had seated this Co-
venant and that nothing should pluck me
from his hands. In this blessed hour I de-
sired to depart and to be with Christ, lest
I should be disturbed again in this happi-
ness.
God be praised for all the grace, He has
bestowed upon me while in the single Sisters
Choir. Admidst all my wants & failings,
which bowed me in the dust and made me
appear as a great Sinner before Him, I could
hartily rejoice over my lot of grace, and had
no other wish, than to continue in this course
all my life.
In 1786 the marriage to my present husband
was proposed to me, and having duly consider'd
this great and important change, and being con-
vinced, that it was according to the gracious
will of God, I gave my consent to it.
Relative to my course in this Choir I have
thousand reasons to thank our Savior for
having given me such a guide through life,
who under all circumstances and amidst
many failings and infirmities has borne me
with great love and patience, & has endeavored
to promot the welfare of my Soul as well
as he could. In the first Year of our marriage
a little Son was born to us, whom our Savior
took to himself when a Year old.
We had to go thro' a variety of difficult cir-
cumstances, partly inseparable from our Ser-
vice and partly occasioned by heavy sick-
nesses; but our Savior has supported us gracious-
ly and never left us without comfort. On
my part I have nothing to boast of, but rather
to be ashamed and to weep tears of contition[?]
at his pierced feet, for having been so little
an honor to Him, in return for what He
has done for and upon me, & for having come
so short of what I ought to have been.
Many a time the Spirit was willing but
the flesh was weak.
                                                      How
How our good Lord, who has been my light and
stay throughout my whole life, will not leave
me now forsake me till my dissolution, and
when it finally comes to that issue:
That I draw my latest breath,
And that Soul and body sever
Them the slaughter'd Lamb & display'd for me
I shall see.
So far her own Narrative.
In her last illness she desired expressly,
that the follow declaration might be
added to her written account:
The holy Ghost at the end of my life has
led me into a School of a very trying nature,
but although I had a much clearer view
of my failings and infirmities than ever be-
fore, my heart nevertheless was more dis-
posed to meditate on the blessed leading
of my dear Savior and to praise & adore Him
for all the love and mercy bestowed upon me,
than to weep and mourn over faults & mis-
demeanors, which He has pardoned".
Now her late husband, the present Wi-
dower contains in the Narrative:
The Seven Years of our married State, were,
as it was, a connected CHain of difficult
circumstances and trials of our faith, and in all
this our wise Leader seemed to have the perfecting
of our late Sister for her eternal rest principally
in view. But a few days and nights of hers
during this period were free from pain & af-
fliction, and every rising hope was soon blasted
again. At times she appeared to herself as
appointed for trouble and I myself was inclined
to think the same. But the Lord was with
her in all her tribulations and his comforts
refreshed her Soul daily and richly, so that
she could sometimes forget her misery en-
tirely and heartily rejoice in God her Savior.
Her greatest distress was that her continual
ailments prevented her attending her office
in the Cong.n agreeably to her wishes. She did
however what she could according to the gift
and grace imported to her, and it was of
great comfort for her to enjoy ev'ry where
the love of the Brethren and SIsters.
After having served the Cong.n at Neusaly
4 Years and the Cong.n at Gnadenfrey one
Year during the Synod, we were called to
London, where we arrived June 5th 1790.
Having always lived in the Country, she
found it very difficult to accustom herself
                                                            to
o such a change of life and climate, and an ac-
count of the poor State of her health she found it
no easy task to learn a new language in short
this proved a new trial to her in all respects.
But she looked up to Him, who remembers
his Servants and handmaids in affliction,
who has numbered all their days and noted them
down in his book; and whenever it appeared
to her as if she was entirely useless, she pos-
sessed her Soul in patience and looked for-
ward to the time, when she hoped to be Ser-
viceable and active.
Meanwhile the Cough she had had before,
increased and she fell into a gradual decline.
We made two short trials, whether she might
be helped by a change of air, which did not
answer our expectations, and when we were
about making a third trial, a fit of illness,
which seized myself, prevented it entirely.
Many a time we both have taken the recove-
ry of her health, as an important matter for
us, into our most Serious consideration, and
not knowing what to do, we have recom-
mended it to our Savior jointly in fervent prayer
& with many tears; which being
answered by a most comfortable experience
of the peace of God, we could take all the

[…]

her for the glory of the world to come. The holy
Ghost discovered unto her all the remaining traces
of her natural depravity and wrought such a Po-
verty of spirit in her, that she gladly forgot all
her good work and even wondered, how the B.rn
& S.rs could show so much love and kindness to her;
for which she was heartily thankful. The merits
of Jesus Christ were exceedingly precious to her
and his bitter sufferings afforded her much com-
fort in her pains. She would often say: oh!
& how deplorable would now be my condition,
if I had not a Savior, if I cou'd not believe in
Him and lay hold on his precious promises.
God be praised! He has forgiven me all my
Sins, and washed them away by with his precious
blood; I have no righteousness of my own to
trust in; but I know, that He loveth me,
& that He will not cast me out, when I come
to him; I am his blood-bought property.
As we were once speaking together about
a certain class of people, who treat their Sal-
vation but superficially, and rather will ex-
cuse than bemoan their fault, she said:
I thank our Savior, that He has never suffered
me, to be careless or indifferent about my
Salvation, but has enabled me thro' grace,
to look upon it at all times as a most serious &
important affair, and to make my calling and
diction sure. Now I reap the benefits from it,
and can heartily rejoice, that the grace of our
Savior has not been frustrated by me.
A b[???] hope of eternal life and of the glory,
which is to be recreated, was an in[?]stionable
jewel to her, and the joyful prospect, to be soon
at home with the Lord, and to see her Redeemer
face to face, made her often forget her pains &
afflictions. She therefore frequently desired,
to have such texts of scripture, and those
fine hymns, which treat of this matter,
read to her, and I could do her no greater
pleasure, than by conversing with her about it.
She would often anticipate the joy, to meet
so many friends & acquaintances, who had
departed to our Savior before her and to see
others following her. In this point of vien[?]
she was heartily thankful, that our Savior had
taken our little Son to himself & also herein
acknowledged the love & wisdom of provi-
dence. For the rest she declared Several times,
that she was entirely delivered from every
attachment to the things of this life, & that
she knew of no impediment, to depart
        and be with Christ the former the better; but me
with less took care, to settle all her matters &
to care for me to the very last day.
Having gone thro' so much sickness [????],
she [???] shot her last illness wou'd be so much
the shorter. But this not being the case, she was
at times very much distressed, y[??] above[?] it in
[?????] about it. However she departed[??]
to our Savior in prayer and begged me some-
times to pray in fellowship with her, whereby
she was remarkably refreshed & comforted. She
resigned herself from time to time into the
will of the Lord & only intocated[?] Him, to write
g[???] her pains and to grant her the [????]
patience, which he also did in mercy. Some-
times she would beg for aword of comfort
suitable to her circumstances, and whenshe
opened the Text - or Hymnbook, she would
get such striking and suitable [???] that
she was filled with joy. Her illness having
much resemblance to that of the late Sister
Louise von Hayer, she desired to have her
life and particularly the latter part read to
her several times and desired also [???] [???]
much comfort, rejoicing in the [???] [???]
[???] whenever she reacted a [???] [???]
of her illness.

She loved to be visited by the B.rn & S.rs but was too
weak for a long conversation. All disagreeable
things that had occured, she could lay aside
and rejoice that she was at peace with every body,
and that she wou'd soon come to that perfected
Cong.n where All is peace and harmony. Many
of those that come to see her were odified[?] by
her mackness and patience and declared, that
that peace of God, which rested her heart, was
to be seen in her countenance & whole deport-
ment.
The nature of her illness requiring much
attendance, she was frequently concerned, lest
she shou'd at length tire out our patience.
But so much the more thankful was she,
that the B.rn & S.rs were willing to assist,
whenever it was wanted, & prayed our Sa-
vior, to reward them richly for all their kind-
nesses. She also remember'd with particular
gratitude the B.rn Lowder & Huslock for
their unremitting attendance in the medi-
cal line.
Her last birthday she celebrated with much
cheerfulness and grateful remembrance of
past benefits and blessings & her last parti-
cipation of the Lord's Supper was attended
with a foretaste of heavenly joy.
                                                                At                                              and
At length the long wish'd for hour of her happy
dissolution arrived when his sufferings seemed
to have risen to the highest degree.
Some days before, after having once in the mid-
dle of the night prayed most affectingly to our
Savior, she said: now the time of my departure
is at hand, he himself has given me a most
comfortable assurance of it. From that time
her patience under increasing Sufferings was
truly admirable, so that Sometimes I was in_
clined to think she was without any pains,
whilst actually according to her own expression,
life and death were struggling within her.
She wou'd often say: I experience indeed, what
it is to die: God be praised that I have only
the pains and not the fear of death, & that
amidst all this I can rejoice that the end of
my natural life will be the end of all my
misery and the beginning of eternal joy.
The 7th of January (1792) being the day of her
departure, in the morning she took our Servant
by the hand & said: Nanny pray for me, to day
I shall go to our Savior. After dinner she desired
me to stay with her and not to leave her on
any account, and soon after the last conflict
began, tho' not attended with any strong con_
vulsions or disagreeable fits. She had many
times expressed a wish, that she might not be a
dishonor to our Savior by unbelief & impatience
in her last hours, but that she might deport
herself as a Child of God to the very last. This
grace was granted unto her and her latter end
was truly edifying. She retain'd her presence
of mind to the last hour, folding her feeble
hands and praying without ceasing; she al-
so begged of us, that were present, to continue
singing and praying; & when I gave her the
last blessing for her departure, she was much
affected. I asked her once more: whether she
desired any thing? she replied: no, nothing
but my release. And this happy release from
all distress & woe she obtained at 9 o'Clock
in the evening, when she fell gently asleep.
Now she rests in the arms of eternal love,
refreshing herself at the very fountain head
of all comfort and joyfully waiting for the
blessed time, when her vile body now com_
mitted to the dust, shall be raised in corrup_
tible & fashioned like unto the glorious
body of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Her Age was 35 days years, 2 months & 7 days.